.TH IP-MGR 8 "2026-06-30" "ip-mgr 1.0.0" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
ip-mgr \- deterministic network-state manager for systemd-networkd hosts
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ip-mgr.sh
.RB [ \-4 | \-6 ]
.RB [ \-y | \-\-yes ]
.I COMMAND
.RI [ TARGET ]
.RI [ OPTIONS... ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh
.RB [ \-4 | \-6 ]
.RB [ \-y | \-\-yes ]
.BR set | add
.I IFACE
.I OPTIONS...
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh
.RB [ \-4 | \-6 ]
.RB [ \-y | \-\-yes ]
.BR remove | delete | del | rem | rm | no
.I IFACE
.RI [ OPTIONS... ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh show
.RI [ candidate | expected | actual | \-\-file: PATH ]
.RI [ IFACE | dns: | domains: | ntp: | route: ]
.RB [ \-\-as\-commands ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh compare
.RI [ SOURCE ]
.RI [ TARGET ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh validate
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh commit
.RB [ \-\-safe\-window [ : N ]]
.RB [ \-\-no\-safe\-window ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh confirm
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh rollback
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh discard
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh apply
.I file.json
.RB [ \-\-save ]
.RB [ \-\-confirm ]
.RB [ \-\-safe\-window [ : N ]]
.RB [ \-\-no\-safe\-window ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh clean
.RB [ \-\-adopt\-live ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-dhcp ]
.RB [ \-\-to\-dhcp ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-candidate ]
.RB [ \-\-apply ]
.RB [ \-\-confirm ]
.RB [ \-\-no\-disable ]
.RB [ \-\-safe\-window [ : N ]]
.RB [ \-\-no\-safe\-window ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh audit
.RB [ \-\-file: PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-fix ]
.RB [ \-\-purge [ : all | : PKG,... ]]
.RB [ \-\-confirm ]
.PP
.B ip-mgr.sh detect
.br
.B ip-mgr.sh snapshot
.br
.B ip-mgr.sh status
.br
.B ip-mgr.sh version
.br
.B ip-mgr.sh help
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ip-mgr
is a Bash network administration utility for Debian Bookworm/Trixie-style
Linux servers.  It normalizes host networking onto
.BR systemd-networkd ,
.BR systemd-resolved ,
and
.BR systemd-timesyncd .
.PP
The tool uses a VyOS-like state model: edit a candidate JSON state, review
it, validate it, then commit it.  Generated systemd files are treated as
disposable output.  The JSON NetworkState is the authoritative intermediate
representation.
.PP
The four state types are:
.TP
.B candidate
The editable staged configuration stored at
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/candidate.json .
.TP
.B expected
The last successfully committed ip-mgr-managed configuration stored at
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/expected.json .
.TP
.B actual
A fresh live interrogation of the host, generated on demand.
.TP
.B snapshot
A timestamped historical capture under
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/snapshots/ .
.SH STATE DIRECTORY
The primary state directory is
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/ .
Common paths are:
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/candidate.json
Editable candidate state.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/expected.json
Last committed expected state.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/commits/
Rollback history, saved as timestamped expected-state JSON.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/snapshots/
Pre-change and manually requested runtime captures.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/last-commit
Timestamp of the last committed revision.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/secrets/
Rendered PPPoE password secret files.
.SH COMMAND ABBREVIATION
Commands may be abbreviated to a unique prefix of at least two characters.
For example,
.B se
resolves to
.BR set ,
.B sh
resolves to
.BR show ,
and
.B va
resolves to
.BR validate .
Ambiguous prefixes fail.  For example,
.B co
is ambiguous between
.B compare
and
.BR commit .
A one-character command is too short.
.PP
The aliases
.BR delete ,
.BR del ,
.BR rem ,
.BR rm ,
and
.B no
all resolve to
.BR remove .
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-4
Limit the operation to IPv4 values where the command supports address-family
selection.
.TP
.B \-6
Limit the operation to IPv6 values where the command supports address-family
selection.
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Answer yes to confirmation prompts.  This is mainly useful for
non-interactive
.BR clean ,
.BR audit ,
and
.B apply
workflows.
.SH EDIT COMMANDS
.SS set and add
.B set
and
.B add
modify
.I candidate.json
only.  They do not directly change the running network stack.
.PP
In v1.0.0,
.B add
is implemented as an alias for
.BR set .
List-valued options append and deduplicate values.  Repeatable switches and
comma-separated values are both accepted.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh set eth0 -a:10.0.10.2/24 -g:10.0.10.1
ip-mgr.sh -6 add eth0 -a:2602:f925:a::400:0/64
ip-mgr.sh set eth0 --address 10.0.10.3/24 --mtu 1500
ip-mgr.sh add eth0 -a:10.0.10.4/24,10.0.10.5/24
.EE
.SS remove
.B remove
modifies
.I candidate.json
only.  With an option value, it removes the matching value.  With a bare
clearable option, it clears the selected collection.  With no options, it
removes VLAN and PPPoE interface definitions only.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh remove eth0 -a:10.0.10.4/24
ip-mgr.sh -4 remove eth0 --address
ip-mgr.sh remove eth1.100
ip-mgr.sh no pppoe0
.EE
.SH INTERFACE OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-a: ADDR ", " \-\-address: ADDR
Add a static CIDR address.  Space-separated form is also accepted:
.BR \-\-address " " ADDR .
IPv6 link-local addresses are rejected as managed static addresses.
.TP
.BR \-g: ADDR ", " \-\-gateway: ADDR ", " \-\-gw: ADDR
Add a default gateway.  Link-local IPv6 gateways are not rendered in v1.0.0
and are rejected for managed gateway configuration.
.TP
.BR \-d: ADDR ", " \-\-dns: ADDR
Add a per-interface DNS server.
.TP
.BR \-s: DOMAIN ", " \-\-search: DOMAIN
Add a per-interface search domain.
.TP
.BR \-m: N ", " \-\-mtu: N
Set MTU.  The JSON schema allows MTU values from 576 through 65535.
.TP
.BR \-D: TEXT ", " \-\-description: TEXT
Set a candidate description string.  Descriptions are stored in state but are
not otherwise operational.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-dhcp
Enable DHCP for the selected family.  With no
.B \-4
or
.B \-6
selector, DHCPv4 is enabled and IPv6 DHCP plus RA acceptance are enabled.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-ra ", " \-\-ndpra
Enable IPv6 Router Advertisement acceptance on the interface.  The
.B --ndpra
form is accepted for compatibility, but the old
.B ndpra
IPv6 option value is not.
.TP
.BR \-6o: LIST ", " \-\-options: LIST
Set IPv6 automatic-addressing policy.  Valid values are
.BR stable ,
.BR privacy ,
and
.BR none .
This option is only valid with
.BR \-6 .
If
.B none
is present, it overrides the other IPv6 automatic-addressing options and
sets IPv6 DHCP and RA acceptance false.
.TP
.BR \-u ", " \-\-up
Mark the interface enabled in candidate state.
.TP
.BR \-x ", " \-\-down
Mark the interface disabled in candidate state.
.SH PSEUDO-TARGETS
Pseudo-targets are used in place of an interface name.
.SS dns:
Manage global DNS resolver addresses.
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add dns: 8.8.8.8 2001:4860:4860::8888
ip-mgr.sh remove dns: 8.8.8.8
ip-mgr.sh -4 remove dns:
.EE
A bare
.B remove dns:
requires
.B \-4
or
.B \-6
and clears all global DNS values of that family.
.SS domains: and domain:
Manage global search domains.
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add domains: internal.example example.com
ip-mgr.sh remove domains:
ip-mgr.sh remove domain: internal.example
.EE
A bare
.B remove domains:
clears all global search domains.
.B domain:
is singular and requires explicit names when removing.
.SS ntp:
Manage global NTP servers for
.BR systemd-timesyncd .
Values may be hostnames or IP addresses.
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add ntp: pool.ntp.org 192.168.1.1
ip-mgr.sh remove ntp: pool.ntp.org
.EE
.SS route:
Manage static routes stored under the target interface.
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add route: --net 10.0.120.0/23 --via 10.0.8.2 --if eth0 --metric 50
ip-mgr.sh -6 add route: --net 2602:f925:f::/48 --via 2602:f925:a::1 --if eth0
ip-mgr.sh remove route: --net 10.0.120.0/23 --if eth0
ip-mgr.sh remove route: --net 10.0.120.0/23 --if eth0 --metric
.EE
The
.B --metric
form on
.B remove route:
clears the route metric without removing the route.
.SH VLANS
An interface name matching
.I PARENT.VLANID
is treated as a VLAN sub-interface.  For example,
.I eth1.100
sets
.I parent
to
.I eth1
and
.I vlan_id
to
.IR 100 .
.PP
VLAN interfaces may be defined before the VLAN device exists in
.IR /sys/class/net .
The parent must be managed by ip-mgr before commit.  Commit renders a
.B .netdev
file for the VLAN and adds a
.B VLAN=
line to the parent
.B .network
file.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add eth1.100 -a:10.0.100.1/24
ip-mgr.sh remove eth1.100
.EE
.SH PPPOE
PPPoE interfaces are declared by setting a parent interface with
.BR \-i: IFACE
or
.BR \-\-if: IFACE .
This changes the candidate interface kind to
.B pppoe
and transport to
.BR tunnel .
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BR \-i: IFACE ", " \-\-if: IFACE
Bind the PPPoE session to a parent Ethernet interface.
.TP
.BR \-\-identity: USER
Set the PPPoE username.
.TP
.BR \-\-pass: PASSWORD
Encrypt the PPPoE password using
.B systemd-creds
before storing it in the NetworkState.  Plaintext is not stored.
.TP
.BR \-\-svcname: NAME
Set the optional PPPoE service name.
.PP
Commit renders the PPPoE section into the parent interface's
.B .network
file and writes a decrypted secret file under
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/secrets/ .
Secret files are recreated during render.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh add pppoe0 -i:eth0 --identity:user@isp.net --pass:secret
ip-mgr.sh set pppoe0 --pass:newpassword
ip-mgr.sh remove pppoe0
.EE
.SH SHOW
.B show
prints a state object, an interface object, or a pseudo-target object.
.PP
If no state is provided,
.B candidate
is used.  Supported states are
.BR candidate ,
.BR expected ,
.BR actual ,
and
.BR \-\-file: PATH .
.B actual
is generated fresh on each invocation.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh show
ip-mgr.sh show candidate
ip-mgr.sh show expected eth0
ip-mgr.sh show actual dns:
ip-mgr.sh show --file:backup.json route:
ip-mgr.sh show candidate --as-commands
.EE
.PP
With
.BR \-\-as\-commands ,
the selected state is rendered back into ip-mgr command syntax.
.SH COMPARE
.B compare
performs a sorted unified JSON diff between two states.  The default is:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh compare expected candidate
.EE
This default makes candidate additions appear as
.B +
lines.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh compare
ip-mgr.sh compare expected actual
ip-mgr.sh compare candidate expected
ip-mgr.sh compare --file:before.json actual
.EE
.SH VALIDATE
.B validate
checks
.I candidate.json
for JSON validity, supported interface
.B transport
and
.B kind
values, invalid managed IPv6 link-local addresses, VLAN parent validity,
and PPPoE consistency.
.PP
A successful validation prints:
.EX
candidate validates
.EE
.SH COMMIT
.B commit
validates the candidate, checks renderer capability, saves the previous
expected state into
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/commits/ ,
renders systemd files, enables/restarts
.BR systemd-networkd ,
.BR systemd-resolved ,
and
.BR systemd-timesyncd ,
then promotes candidate to expected.
.PP
Rendered files include:
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/network/10-ip-mgr-IFACE.network
systemd-networkd interface files.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/network/10-ip-mgr-IFACE.netdev
VLAN netdev files.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/resolved.conf.d/ip-mgr.conf
Global DNS and search-domain policy.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/timesyncd.conf.d/ip-mgr.conf
Global NTP policy.
.PP
.B commit
also rewires
.I /etc/resolv.conf
to
.I /run/systemd/resolve/stub-resolv.conf
and backs up a regular-file
.I /etc/resolv.conf
once to
.IR /etc/resolv.conf.ip-mgr-bak .
.SH SAFE WINDOW AND CONFIRM
When running over SSH,
.B commit
automatically arms a default 60-second auto-rollback timer unless disabled.
Trial
.B apply
always arms an auto-rollback timer unless disabled.
.PP
Options:
.TP
.B \-\-safe\-window
Arm the default safe window explicitly.
.TP
.BI \-\-safe\-window: N
Arm an
.I N
second window.  The minimum is 10 seconds.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-safe\-window
Do not arm auto-rollback.  Use carefully on remote systems.
.PP
Run
.B ip-mgr.sh confirm
after a successful remote apply or commit to cancel the pending timer and
make the configuration permanent.
.PP
If no timer is active,
.B confirm
is idempotent and reports that no pending auto-rollback was found.
.SH ROLLBACK AND DISCARD
.TP
.B rollback
Restores the previous expected state from
.IR /etc/ip-mgr/commits/ ,
copies it to candidate, renders networkd files, and restarts
.BR systemd-networkd .
.TP
.B discard
Copies expected state back over candidate state without touching the live
network.  Use this to abandon staged edits.
.SH APPLY
.B apply
renders and activates a NetworkState JSON file without using the normal
candidate-edit workflow.
.PP
The source file must be valid JSON with
.B schema_version
set to
.BR 1 .
The source state is merged over current expected state; source fields win,
and unmentioned interfaces/settings are preserved from expected.
.PP
Without
.BR \-\-save ,
.B apply
is trial mode: it renders and restarts the systemd network stack, then arms
auto-rollback unless
.B \-\-no\-safe\-window
is supplied.  Run
.B confirm
to keep the result.
.PP
With
.BR \-\-save ,
.B apply
promotes the result permanently by harvesting the post-apply running state
as the new expected state and copying it to candidate.
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh apply subset.json
ip-mgr.sh confirm
ip-mgr.sh apply subset.json --save
ip-mgr.sh apply subset.json --safe-window:120
.EE
.SH CLEAN
.B clean
normalizes an existing host into ip-mgr/systemd-networkd control.  It is a
staged pipeline:
.PP
.RS
Snapshot \(-> Detect \(-> Acquire \(-> Report \(-> Transform \(-> Analyze \(-> Validate \(-> Compare \(-> Write
.RE
.PP
By default, it captures live state, reports what was found, generates and
validates a candidate for review, and does not apply it.
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BR \-\-adopt\-live ", " \-\-adopt\-actual
Adopt live state into candidate.  This is the default v1.0.0 behavior.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-dhcp
Ignore discovered dynamic DHCP/RA lease addresses.
.TP
.B \-\-to\-dhcp
Convert discovered static assignments into DHCPv4 / RA+DHCPv6 intent.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-candidate
Analyze and report without writing
.IR candidate.json .
This also suppresses apply and old-stack disable behavior.
.TP
.BR \-\-apply ", " \-\-commit
Commit the generated candidate after confirmation.
.TP
.B \-\-confirm
Skip the interactive
.B \-\-apply
prompt.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-disable
With
.BR \-\-apply ,
leave competing network control-plane services running.
.TP
.B \-\-disable\-old
With
.BR \-\-apply ,
disable competing network control-plane services.  This is the default
unless
.B \-\-no\-disable
or
.B \-\-no\-candidate
is used.
.TP
.BR \-\-scorched\-earth ", " \-\-force
More aggressive mode.  Requires
.BR \-\-apply .
.PP
Examples:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh clean
ip-mgr.sh clean --no-candidate
ip-mgr.sh clean --no-dhcp --to-dhcp
ip-mgr.sh clean --apply --confirm --safe-window:120
.EE
.SH STATUS
.B status
is implemented as
.B clean --no-candidate
with any additional arguments passed through.  It reports/detects/analyzes
without writing candidate state.
.SH DETECT
.B detect
reports installed, enabled, active, and configured network-control stacks,
including
.BR systemd-networkd ,
.BR NetworkManager ,
.BR networking ,
.BR dhcpcd ,
.BR connman ,
.BR netplan ,
and
.BR systemd-resolved .
It also reports interface ownership evidence when supporting tools such as
.B nmcli
or
.B networkctl
are available.
.SH AUDIT
.B audit
investigates the host against the last committed expected state.  It reports
schema consistency, expected-state presence, control-plane health, rendered
file presence, and drift between expected and live state.
.PP
Options:
.TP
.BI \-\-file: PATH
Audit a JSON state file rather than the live host.
.TP
.B \-\-fix
Apply safe remediations, such as disabling competing stacks or restoring
expected rendered state.
.TP
.B \-\-purge
With
.BR \-\-fix ,
purge packages for disabled competing stacks.
.TP
.B \-\-purge:all
With
.BR \-\-fix ,
purge all known competing stacks.  The systemd stack is protected.
.TP
.BI \-\-purge: PKG,...
With
.BR \-\-fix ,
purge named packages.
.TP
.B \-\-confirm
Skip interactive prompts.
.SH SNAPSHOT
.B snapshot
creates a timestamped directory under
.I /etc/ip-mgr/snapshots/
containing runtime network state, actual JSON, candidate/expected JSON if
present, relevant configuration directories, resolver state where available,
and route/rule diagnostics.
.PP
Captured files include
.BR ip-link.json ,
.BR ip-addr.json ,
.BR ip-route4.json ,
.BR ip-route6.json ,
.BR actual.json ,
and copies of relevant configuration directories.
.SH VERSION
.B version
prints the tool version and NetworkState schema version.
.PP
Example:
.EX
ip-mgr version 1.0.0
schema version 1
.EE
.SH BATCH MODE
If
.B ip-mgr.sh
is run with no command-line arguments and standard input is a pipe or
heredoc, it reads one ip-mgr subcommand per line.
Blank lines and lines beginning with
.B #
are ignored after comment stripping.  Execution stops on the first error.
.PP
Example:
.EX
ip-mgr.sh <<'EOF'
set eth0 -a:10.0.10.2/24 -g:10.0.10.1
add dns: 10.0.10.230
compare expected candidate
commit --safe-window:120
EOF
.EE
.SH ACTUAL STATE AND OBSERVED DATA
Actual state is generated from the running OS using tools such as
.BR ip ,
.BR networkctl ,
and resolver tooling where available.
.PP
Observed-only interfaces, such as WireGuard, tun/tap, GRE, Docker, veth,
bridges, and bonds, are included with
.B managed=false
unless ip-mgr has explicit rendering support for their lifecycle.
Their runtime addresses are recorded as observed evidence rather than
managed intent.
.PP
IPv6 link-local addresses are observed evidence and must not be stored as
managed static addresses.  Dynamic DHCPv4 and RA/SLAAC addresses are also
runtime evidence unless explicitly adopted by a clean/apply workflow.
.SH RENDERER NOTES
The v1.0.0 renderer targets
.BR systemd-networkd ,
.BR systemd-resolved ,
and
.BR systemd-timesyncd .
It can render managed Ethernet, Wi-Fi-shaped Ethernet, VLAN, PPPoE, default
gateways, static routes, static addresses, per-interface DNS/search domains,
global DNS/search domains, global NTP, DHCP policy, RA policy, and IPv6
privacy/stable policy.
.PP
Scoped/on-link IPv6 link-local gateways are not safely rendered in v1.0.0
and are blocked by renderer capability validation.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/candidate.json
Candidate state.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/expected.json
Expected state.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/commits/
Rollback history.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/snapshots/
Snapshots.
.TP
.I /etc/ip-mgr/secrets/
Rendered PPPoE secrets.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/network/10-ip-mgr-*.network
Rendered systemd-networkd network files.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/network/10-ip-mgr-*.netdev
Rendered VLAN netdev files.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/resolved.conf.d/ip-mgr.conf
Rendered global resolver policy.
.TP
.I /etc/systemd/timesyncd.conf.d/ip-mgr.conf
Rendered NTP policy.
.TP
.I /etc/resolv.conf.ip-mgr-bak
One-time backup of a pre-existing regular-file
.IR /etc/resolv.conf .
.SH REQUIREMENTS
.B ip-mgr
requires a systemd-based Linux system.  Required tools checked at startup
include
.BR jq ,
.BR ip ,
.BR diff ,
and
.BR systemctl .
Some optional inspections use tools such as
.BR nmcli ,
.BR networkctl ,
and
.BR resolvectl
when present.
.PP
PPPoE password storage requires
.BR systemd-creds .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Command completed successfully.
.TP
.B non-zero
The command failed, validation failed, a dependency was missing, a prompt was
declined, an unsafe or unsupported state was requested, or a live apply/commit
operation failed.
.SH EXAMPLES
.EX
# Stage static IPv4 and IPv6 addressing.
ip-mgr.sh set eth0 -a:10.0.10.2/24 -g:10.0.10.1
ip-mgr.sh -6 add eth0 -a:2602:f925:a::400:0/64 -n -6o:stable

# Add global resolver and NTP policy.
ip-mgr.sh add dns: 10.0.10.230
ip-mgr.sh add domains: botanybay.net
ip-mgr.sh add ntp: pool.ntp.org

# Review, validate, and commit with a longer safe window.
ip-mgr.sh compare expected candidate
ip-mgr.sh validate
ip-mgr.sh commit --safe-window:120
ip-mgr.sh confirm

# Convert an existing host into a candidate, review, then apply.
ip-mgr.sh clean
ip-mgr.sh compare expected candidate
ip-mgr.sh clean --apply --confirm
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemd.network (5),
.BR systemd.netdev (5),
.BR systemd-networkd.service (8),
.BR systemd-resolved.service (8),
.BR systemd-timesyncd.service (8),
.BR ip (8),
.BR jq (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Net-Xpert Consulting / Brett Leuszler.
